ieee.txt

https://www.ieee.org/membership-catalog/index.html?srchProdType=Societies&searchType=prodType

AESS - Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Organization, system enginnering, design, development, integration,
and operation of complex systems for space, air, ocean, or ground
environments.

APS - Antennas and Propagation
Antenna systems and electromagnetic ware propagation and scattering
in complex media for wireless communication, sensing, medical and
other applications.

BTS - Broadcast Technology
A broadcasting slant on: equipment, techniques and systems related
to production, wired and wireless distribution, transmission,
propagation and reception.

CAS - Circuits and Systems
Theoretical foundations, applications, architectures, as well as
circuits and systems implementation of algorithms for signal &
infomation processing.

ComSoc - Communications
Information transfer with signals: terminals, computers, systems
and operations, transmission media networks, layout, protocol, and
architecture.

Computational intelligence
Biological and linguistic computational paradigms: neural networks,
evolutionary algorithms, fuzzy systems, and hybrid intelligent systems.

Computer
All major areas of computing and information technology: computer
hardware, software, multimedia, IT, security, networking, mobile
computing and more.

CTSoc - Consumer Technology
All aspects of the modeling design, construction, testing, and end-use
of mass-market smart devices, systems, software, artificial intelligence,
big data technology and services for advanced consumer products and
services.

Control System
Design, automatic control, and optimization of dynamic systems, both
physical and human-made: theoretic advances and applications in diverse
technological areas of societal and economic importance.

DEIS - Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation
Materials, measurements, numerical modelling, components, applications
and systems pertinent to dielectrics and electrical insulation.

Education
Theory and practice of education and educational technology and professional
development programs within IEEE fields.

EMC - Electromagnetic Compatibility
EMC enhancement through engieering standards, measurement techniques/test
procedures, instrumentation, equipment and systems characteristics.

EDS - Electron Devices
Engineering, physics, theory, experiment and simulation of electron and
ion devices and their applications to engineering, medicine and sciences.

Electronics Packaging
Packaging and integration of electronic, optoelectronic, biological,
micromechanical and sensing components, addressing signal and power delivery,
material aspects, thermal and structural design and reliability.

EMBS - Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Engineering concepts and methods used with biology, medicine & health sciences
to effect solutions to biological, medical & healthcare problems.

GRSS - Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Theory, concepts, and techniques of science and engineering as they apply to
the remote sensing of the earth, oceans, atmosphere, and space, as well as the
processing, interpretation and dissemination of this information.

Industrial Electronics

Industry Applications

Information Theory

Instrumentation and Measurement

Intelligent Trasportation

Magnetics

Microware Theory and Technology

Nuclear and Plasma Sciences

Oceanic Engineering

Photonics

Power & Energy

Power Electronics

Product Safety Engineering

Professional Communication

Reliability

Robotics and Automation

Signal Processing

Social Implications of Technology

Solid-state Circuits
Design, implementation, and application of solid-state integrated circuits;
including computers, communications, signal processing, optoelectronics.

Systems, Man, and Cypernetics
Integration of the theories of communication, control, cybernetics, systems,
and human-factors engineering.

Techonology and Engineering Management

Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control

Vehicular Technology
Land, airbone, maritime mobile communications. Vehicular electro-techonology,
automotive industry systems. Traction power, signals, control systems.



 
